What was the word for what?
What when it's not a question is loke
Lok for example if you want to say I saw what you're doing.
This is not a question
No?
I saw what you're doing.
Here the what is not a question.
Here it's lo que.
I cooked what they're eating.
I cooked.
what they're eating.
Here, what is not a question?
No.
Yo cosine, I cooked lo que comen.
Or lo que están comiendo, if we mean right now.
So what
Not as a question is lo que how would you say I don't want you to speak about what we spoke about but you know we don't need this about
So the first bit is I don't want you to speak and let's speak informally.
I don't want you to speak.
I don't want that you speak
No quiero que hables.
Very good.
No quiero que hables about is it de you could use or you could use
Sobre.
Good.
So no quiero que hables de or sobre what we spoke about.
And we can just say what we spoke.
Lo que hablamos.
Yes, it's the same in the past.
So give it to me now altogether.
I don't want you to speak about what we spoke about.
From the beginning and thinking it through again.
No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos.
No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos, o no quiero que hables de lo que hablamos.
But that sentence could be ambiguous, no?
I mean in your mind when you're creating this sentence you will have the context very strongly in your mind that you're thinking about what we spoke about the other day
But that doesn't necessarily mean that the person receiving it has that same context in their mind.
They might, depends what your conversation is about.
But if you don't have a context
that's shared, it could be ambiguous.
You could understand, I don't want you to speak about what we speak about generally.
Because of course we have hablamos, which can be past or present.
No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos generally.
So there's two ways here that you could uh clarify.
You could add something like the other day, el otro día.
No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos el otro día.
So you are showing with some time expression that it was past, or you could use the line in the past, what we were speaking about, because here it's interchangeable.
The meaning changes so slightly and both meanings are fine.
No?
If we look at English, I don't want you to speak about what we were speaking about.
I don't want you to speak about what we spoke about.
So maybe here in Spanish you choose the line in the past just so it's obvious that you're talking about the past.
So let's give it another go.
Using the line in the past
I don't want you to speak about what we were speaking about.
I don't want you to speak informally still
No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablábamos.
Very good.
Necessity, necessity in Spanish is, do you know remember what to do with it words to make them Spanish?
Good.
So necesity becomes necesidad.
Necesidad.
To need is necesitar.
Necesitar.
Good.
How would you say I need?
Necesito.
I need you to prepare it.
Let's speak formally.
I need you to prepare it formally
In English again it would be I need that you prepare it.
Exactly.
Necessito che lo repare.
Very good.
Necesito que lo prepare.
This is to you formally.
If you wanted to make it clear that you were speaking to you or not speaking about him or her, how would you do that here?
I need you to prepare it
Necesito que usted lo prepare.
Very good.
Necessito que usted lo prepare.
Necesito que lo prepare usted.
Very good.
So with quiero que necesito que we're seeing two things that they have in common.
We have a verb like quiero, necesito.
a verb that's showing what we want to occur in the world, expressing our subjectivity, let's say, in this way.
And we have the structural similarity that the mood tense is coming after ke
To be short of, to be short of, to be missing, to lack is faldar.
Quite uncomfortable translations, but this is a very common verb in Spanish.
Faltar.
It's used very often, this verb in Spanish.
For example, you could say, I need you to prepare what's missing.
I need you to prepare what's missing, what's left over, what we need to do still.
So again, formally, I need you to prepare
Necessito que repare.
Good.
What's missing?
Lo que falta.
Necessito che prepare lo que falta and lo que because the what here is not a question.
Very good.
The noun is also used quite often.
The noun is falta, la falta
So falta means lack.
Lack.
So if I say falta de consideración, what does it mean?
Falta de consideración.
All right, lack of consideration.
Good, lack of consideration.
It's also used with respect, falta de respecto, lack of respect.
And it's also used in the expression asefalta.
It makes lack.
It makes lack, which just is another way of saying it's necessary, but it's very common.
And asefalta ke
Of course, is followed by this mood tense.
In the same way that we do with quiero que, necesito ke, we will follow it with this mood tense.
So if you wanted to say using asefalta
It is necessary that we eat soon.
What was the word for soon?
Is it pronto?
That's that's it.
In Italian actually it means ready pronto
This is why when Italians answer the phone they say Bronto because historically let's say there was a operator there connecting the wires and they were there going, Ready?
Are you ready?
Is it ready?
Can you hear me?
But uh s in Spanish it's uh soon, like the British slang, people say in England, queer soon.
So it makes lack ace falta, uh it makes lack that we eat soon.
Sorry, couldn't you explain again how why does that make sense?
It makes lack that we eat soon.
It makes lack
would be the literal translation but literal translations are often uncomfortable.
No especially when we're talking about fixed expressions
So asefalda is an extremely common expression, quite difficult to translate comfortably.
Just another way of saying it's necessary.
So it makes la co a cefalta that we eat soon?
How would it be?
Acefalta che
Hace falta que comamos pronto.
So hace falta you will hear around a lot, and falta is a noun, you will hear it in especially in phrases like falta de respetto and lack of respect.
You hear that a lot.
And faltar as a verb to lack or to be missing is also very useful.
To prefer in Spanish is preferir, preferir.
Preferir.
How is I prefer?
Prefero.
It should be.
Prefiero.
Better.
Good.
So again, if you say I prefer him to stay, we're not going to say I prefer him to stay.
We will say I prefer that he stays
And what what are we going to do if he stays?
I think you're getting the gist now.
Mood tense.
So it's not just the structures that we are identifying, it's the feeling.
This is very important for the mood tense.
What you want to really get your head around is the feeling of the mood tense.
So you can start experimenting
About where you would use it and listening out for where you hear people using it.
I prefer that he stays.
I prefer for him to stay.
I prefer that he stays
Prefiero que se chieda.
Sorry, chiede.
Good.
Prefiero que se chede.
I prefer them to stay.
I prefer for them to stay.
Prefiero che se queden.
I prefer that they don't stay here.
I prefer for them not to stay here.
Prefiero que se k no se keden aquí.
Good.
Prefiero que no se keden aquí.
Very good.
How would you say I prefer you to give it to him?
I prefer you, speaking informally, to give it to him.
Exactly.
Prefiero que lo le ha se lo des that's it good prefiero que se lo des
So this could mean I prefer you to give it to him, to her.
How would we clarify it if we want to show it to him?
I prefer you to give it to him
Prefiero que se lo des a el good.
And what if it was uh to her
A ella.
Prefiero que se lo des a ella.
Good.
Prefiero que se lo des
Aeya, very good.
So to clarify, we can then say aeya to show afterwards who we meant with se